https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mancala

General gameplay

Most mancala games have a common gameplay. Players begin by placing a certain number of seeds, prescribed for the 
particular game, in each of the pits on the game board. A player may count their stones to plot the game. A turn 
consists of removing all seeds from a pit, "sowing" the seeds (placing one in each of the following pits in sequence), 
and capturing based on the state of the board. The game's object is to plant the most seeds in the bank. This leads 
to the English phrase "count and capture" sometimes used to describe the gameplay. Although the details differ 
greatly, this general sequence applies to all games.

If playing in capture mode, once a player ends their turn in an empty pit on their own side, they capture the opponent's
pieces directly across. Once captured, the player gets to put the seeds in their own bank. After capturing, the 
opponent forfeits a turn.

Equipment

Mancala board and clay playing pieces
Equipment is typically a board, constructed of various materials, with a series of holes arranged in rows, usually 
two or four. The materials include clay and other shapeable materials. Some games are more often played with holes 
dug in the earth, or carved in stone. The holes may be referred to as "depressions", "pits", or "houses". Sometimes, 
large holes on the ends of the board called stores, are used for holding the pieces.

Playing pieces are seeds, beans, stones, cowry shells, half-marbles or other small undifferentiated counters that are
placed in and transferred about the holes during play.

Board configurations vary among different games but also within variations of a given game; for example Endodoi is played
on boards from 2×6 to 2×10. The largest are Tchouba (Mozambique) with a board of 160 (4×40) holes requiring 320 seeds, and
En Gehé (Tanzania), played on longer rows with up to 50 pits (a total of 2×50=100) and using 400 seeds. The most
minimalistic variants are Nano-Wari and Micro-Wari, created by the Bulgarian ethnologue Assia Popova. The Nano-Wari 
board has eight seeds in just two pits; Micro-Wari has a total of four seeds in four pits.

With a two-rank board, players usually are considered to control their respective sides of the board, 
although moves often are made into the opponent's side. With a four-rank board, players control an inner row and an
outer row, and a player's seeds will remain in these closest two rows unless the opponent captures them.

Objective

The objective of most two- and three-row mancala games is to capture more stones than the opponent; in 
four-row games, one usually seeks to leave the opponent with no legal move or sometimes to capture all counters in their
front row.

At the beginning of a player's turn, they select a hole with seeds that will be sown around the board. This selection 
is often limited to holes on the current player's side of the board, as well as holes with a certain minimum number of seeds.


Sowing on a kalah board. The player picks up all four seeds from hole A, and places one of them in B, one in C, one
in D and the fourth in E
In a process known as sowing, all the seeds from a hole are dropped one by one into subsequent holes in a motion wrapping
around the board. Sowing is an apt name for this activity, since not only are many games traditionally played with seeds 
but placing seeds one at a time in different holes reflects the physical act of sowing. If the sowing action stops after dropping
the last seed, the game is considered a single lap game.

Multiple laps or relay sowing is a frequent feature of mancala games, although not universal. When relay sowing, if the last 
seed during sowing lands in an occupied hole, all the contents of that hole, including the last sown seed, are immediately 
re-sown from the hole. The process usually will continue until sowing ends in an empty hole. Another common way to receive 
"multiple laps" is when the final seed sown lands in your designated hole.

Many games from the Indian subcontinent use pussakanawa laps. These are like standard multi-laps, but instead of continuing the
movement with the contents of the last hole filled, a player continues with the next hole. A pussakanawa lap move will then end
when a lap ends just before an empty hole.

If a player ends their stone with a point move they get a "free turn".

Capturing

Depending on the last hole sown in a lap, a player may capture stones from the board. The exact requirements for 
capture, as well as what is done with captured stones, vary considerably among games. Typically, a capture requires
sowing to end in a hole with a certain number of stones, ending across the board from stones in specific configurations
or landing in an empty hole adjacent to an opponent's hole that contains one or more pieces.

Another common way of capturing is to capture the stones that reach a certain number of seeds at any moment.

Also, several games include the notion of capturing holes, and thus all seeds sown on a captured hole belong at the end
of the game to the player who captured it.

